Database structure overview
In this reading, you’ll find out more about the basic database structure. You’ve been introduced to what a table is in a database, the basic structure of a table, data types, what primary and foreign keys are and the roles they play in a table. You also learned about table constraints. 

The main objective of this reading is to cover the basic structure of a database. In other words, you will learn more about tables, fields (or attributes), records, keys and table relationships.

What is database structure?
Database structure refers to how data is arranged in a database. Within a database, related data are grouped into tables, each of which consists of rows (also called tuples) and columns, like in a spreadsheet.

The structure of a database consists of a set of key components. These include:      

Tables or entities, where the data is stored. 

Attributes which are details about the table or entity. In other words, attributes describe the table.  

Fields, which are columns used to capture attributes. 

A record, which is one row of details about a table or entity. 

And the primary key, which is a unique value for an entity. 

This image shows the basic structural elements of a database table.

Example of a table in a database with key elements of the structure highlighted.

Table
A table contains all the fields, attributes and records for a type of entity. A database will most probably contain more than one table.

Fields
Column headings are known as fields. Each field contains a different attribute. For every table, a unit of data is entered into each field. It’s also known as a column value. Each column has a data type. For example, the “agent_name” column has a data type of text, and the “commission” column has a numeric data type.

Column value or unit of data
Each individual piece of data entered into a column is a unit of data. These units are also called data elements or column values.

Records
A record consists of a collection of data for each entity. It’s also known as a row in the table.

Data types
To keep the data consistent from one record to the next, an appropriate data type is assigned to each column. The data type of a column determines what type of data can be stored in each column.

Data types are also a way of classifying data values or column values. Different kinds of data values or column values require different amounts of memory to store them. Different operations can be performed on those column values based on their datatypes.

What is good database design?
Certain principles guide the database design process. The first principle is that duplicate information (also called redundant data) is bad, because it wastes space and increases the likelihood of errors and inconsistencies. The second principle is that the correctness and completeness of information is important. If your database contains incorrect information, any reports that pull information from the database will also contain incorrect information. As a result, any decisions you make that are based on those reports will then be misinformed.

A good database design is, therefore, one that:

Divides your information into subject-based tables to reduce redundant data.

Provides Access with the information it requires to join the information in the tables together as needed.

Helps support and ensure the accuracy and integrity of your information.

Accommodates your data processing and reporting needs.

The design process consists of the following steps:

Determine the purpose of your database    

This helps prepare you for the remaining steps.

Find and organize the information required     

Gather all of the types of information you might want to record in the database, such as product name and order number.

Divide the information into tables    

Divide your information items into major entities or subjects, such as Products or Orders. Each subject then becomes a table.

Turn information items into columns    

Decide what information you want to store in each table. Each item becomes a field, and is displayed as a column in the table. For example, an Employees table might include fields such as Last Name and Hire Date.

Specify primary keys    

Choose each table’s primary key. The primary key is a column that is used to uniquely identify each row. An example might be Product ID or Order ID.

Set up the table relationships    

Look at each table and decide how the data in one table is related to the data in other tables. Add fields to tables or create new tables to clarify the relationships, as necessary.

Refine your design    

Analyze your design for errors. Create the tables and add a few records of sample data. See if you can get the results you want from your tables. Make adjustments to the design, as needed.

Apply the normalization rules    

Apply the data normalization rules to see if your tables are structured correctly. Make adjustments to the tables, as needed.

A key point to remember is that you should break each piece of information into its smallest useful parts. In the case of a name, to make the last name readily available, you will break the name into two parts — First Name and Last Name. To sort a report by last name, for example, it helps to have the customer's last name stored separately. In general, if you want to sort, search, calculate, or report based on an item of information, you should put that item in its own field.

If you don’t have in mind a column or set of columns that might make a good primary key, consider using a column that has the AutoNumber data type. When you use the AutoNumber data type, Access automatically assigns a value for you. Such an identifier is factless; it contains no factual information describing the row that it represents. Factless identifiers are ideal for use as a primary key because they do not change. A primary key that contains facts about a row — a telephone number or a customer name, for example — is more likely to change, because the factual information itself might change.

Some common data types used in databases are:

Numeric data types such as INT, TINYINT, BIGINT, FLOAT and REAL. 

Date and time data types such as DATE, TIME and DATETIME. 

Character and string data types such as CHAR and VARCHAR.

Binary data types such as BINARY and VARBINARY. 

And miscellaneous data types such as: 

Character Large Object (CLOB), for storing a large block of text in some form of text encoding.  

and Binary Large Object (BLOB), for storing a collection of binary data such as images. 

Logical database structure
The logical structure of a database is represented using a diagram known as the Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD). It is a visual representation of how the database will be implemented into tables during physical database design, using a Database Management System (DBMS) like MySQL or Oracle, for example. 

A part of the logical database structure is how relationships are established between entities. These relationships are established between the instances of the entities. Accordingly, there can be three ways in which entity instances can be related to each other:

One-to-one relationships 

One-to-many relationships 

Many-to-many relationships 

This is also known as cardinality of relationships. The logical database structure which is represented using an ERD also depicts these relationships.

Here’s an example of an ERD that has all these elements.

 

Entity relationship diagram with a range of different relationships between entities.
Physical database structure
In the physical database structure, where entities are implemented as tables, the relationships are established using a field known as a foreign key. A foreign key is a field in one table that refers to a common field in another table (usually the primary key). 

Let’s take the example of a database that contains two tables: student and department. The student table has a primary key of “Stud_id”, which is also present in the Department table as a foreign key. Therefore, the two tables are related to each other via the “Stud_id” field.

physical database structure with primary and foreign keys example
In this reading, you learned more about the basic database structure including tables, fields or attributes, records, keys and relationships between tables.